Document Grafana Alloy integration (#149)
trento-project/docs: trento/adoc/trento-integration-prometheus.adoc

include::product-attributes.adoc[]

:revdate: 2026-02-05
== {prometheus} integration

> {prometheus} Server is a {trserver} component responsible for retrieving the memory and CPU utilization metrics from the agent hosts and serving them to the web component. The web component renders the metrics as dynamic graphical charts in the details view of the registered hosts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{prometheus} Server is a {trserver} component responsible for retrieving host metrics from the agent hosts and serving them to the web component. The web component renders some of these metrics as graphical charts in the details view of the registered hosts. Particularly: memory, CPU, filesystem and swap utilization.
```

=== Requirements for {sles4sap} 15 hosts (pull mode)

The `node_exporter` must be installed and running in the agent hosts and {prometheus} Server must be able to reach the agent hosts at the IP address and port that the `node_exporter` is bound to.

The IP address and port that {prometheus} Server uses to reach the `node_exporter` can be changed by setting parameter `node-exporter-target` with value `<ip_address>:<port>` in the agent configuration file.

If the parameter is not set, {prometheus} Server uses the lowest IPv4 address discovered in the host with default port 9100.

=== Requirements for {sles4sap} 16 hosts (push mode)

{sles4sap} 16 uses {grafana} Alloy instead of `node_exporter` for metrics collection. In this mode:

* {grafana} Alloy must be installed and running on the agent hosts.
* The {prometheus} remote write endpoint must be enabled on {trserver}.
* The {tragent} generates the Alloy configuration using the `trento-agent generate alloy` command.

See <<configuring-alloy>> for detailed setup instructions.

=== {kube} deployment

> When using the {helm} chart to deploy {trserver} on a {kube} cluster, an image of {prometheus} Server is deployed automatically. No further actions are required by the user, other than ensuring that it can reach the `node-exporter` in the agent hosts.

Author: The hosts are not involved in the helm chart; this paragraph may be confusing. The helm chart we provide is self sufficient

[[configuring-alloy]]
=== Configuring {grafana} Alloy

On {sles4sap} 16, {grafana} Alloy replaces `node_exporter` for collecting system metrics. On {sles4sap} 15 SP7, Alloy is available as an optional package for users who prefer push-based metrics collection.

The {tragent} provides a command to generate the required Alloy configuration.

==== Prerequisites

* {grafana} Alloy must be installed on the host:
** On {sles4sap} 16, it is available in the default repositories.
** On {sles4sap} 15 SP7, it is available as an optional package.
* The {prometheus} remote write endpoint must be enabled on {trserver} (see <<enabling-remote-write>>).

==== Generate and deploy the Alloy configuration

. Install {grafana} Alloy:
+
[source,bash]
----
zypper install alloy
----

. Configure the {tragent} with the required parameters for push mode in `/etc/trento/agent.yaml`. At minimum, you must set:
+
[source,yaml]
----
prometheus-mode: push
prometheus-url: https://<trento-server>/api/v1/write
prometheus-auth: bearer

> prometheus-auth-bearer-token: <your-token>

Author: Good point, we must explain this better.

The token is static and it's provided by the user to the playbook at installation time.

These credentials propagate automatically to the agent role, so agents deployed by the same playbook are configured to authenticate against the {prometheus} endpoint without additional setup.

To explicitly disable authentication (not recommended for production):

[source,yaml]
----
all:
  vars:
    trento_prometheus_auth: "none"
----

WARNING: Running without authentication allows anyone with network access to push arbitrary metrics to {prometheus}.

==== Custom deployments

For custom deployments not using the official {helm} chart or {ansible} playbook, the {prometheus} remote write endpoint must be enabled and exposed manually. The procedure below walks through how to add an authenticated `/prometheus/` endpoint to an existing {trserver} installation that already has {nginx} running as a TLS-terminating reverse proxy in front of the {tr_web} and {tr_wanda} services.

{grafana} Alloy supports basic authentication, bearer token, and mutual TLS (mTLS) when pushing metrics. Configure your reverse proxy to validate credentials using the method of your choice. The example below uses HTTP basic authentication.

===== Enable the {prometheus} remote write receiver

> {prometheus} must be started with the `--web.enable-remote-write-receiver` flag. How to set this flag depends on how {prometheus} is managed on your platform (for example, via a sysconfig file, a systemd drop-in, or a command-line argument).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{prometheus} must be started with the --web.enable-remote-write-receiver flag. How to set this flag depends on how {prometheus} is managed on your platform (for example, via a sysconfig file, a {systemd} drop-in, or a command-line argument). In a sysconfig file scenario, add ARGS="--web.enable-remote-write-receiver" to the /etc/sysconfig/prometheus configuration file.
```

+
NOTE: When using the {ansible} playbook, the agent configuration is set automatically from the inventory variables.
+
The {tragent} also supports `bearer`, `mtls`, and `none` authentication methods. See the {tragent} configuration documentation for the complete list of available parameters.

. Generate the Alloy configuration and deploy it:
+
The generated configuration enables the following collectors by default:
+
[cols="1,2"]
|===
|Collector |Description

|`cpu`
|CPU usage statistics

|`cpufreq`
|CPU frequency scaling

|`loadavg`
|System load averages

|`meminfo`
|Memory usage statistics

|`filesystem`
|Filesystem usage and capacity

|`netdev`
|Network device statistics

|`uname`
|System information (kernel version, architecture)
|===
+
These collectors cover the metrics used by {trento} to render CPU and memory charts in the host detail view. If you need additional system metrics, you can edit the generated Alloy configuration to add more collectors from the https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/prometheus/prometheus.exporter.unix/#collectors-list[full list of available collectors].

> +

Author: Not relevant for this PR

==== Custom deployments

For custom deployments not using the official {helm} chart or {ansible} playbook, the {prometheus} remote write endpoint must be enabled and exposed manually. The procedure below walks through how to add an authenticated `/prometheus/` endpoint to an existing {trserver} installation that already has {nginx} running as a TLS-terminating reverse proxy in front of the {tr_web} and {tr_wanda} services.

{grafana} Alloy supports basic authentication, bearer token, and mutual TLS (mTLS) when pushing metrics. Configure your reverse proxy to validate credentials using the method of your choice. The example below uses HTTP basic authentication.

===== Enable the {prometheus} remote write receiver

> {prometheus} must be started with the `--web.enable-remote-write-receiver` flag. How to set this flag depends on how {prometheus} is managed on your platform (for example, via a sysconfig file, a systemd drop-in, or a command-line argument).

Reviewer: If the user has followed our manual steps to install Prometheus, it will be a sysconfig file scenario. I suggest we explain how to do it in that case. Something like the following:

{prometheus} must be started with the `--web.enable-remote-write-receiver` flag. How to set this flag depends on how {prometheus} is managed on your platform (for example, via a sysconfig file, a {systemd} drop-in, or a command-line argument). In a sysconfig file scenario, add `ARGS="--web.enable-remote-write-receiver"` to the `/etc/sysconfig/prometheus` configuration file.
